---
slug: "do-not-trust-on-yourself-trust-on-checklists"
title: "Do not trust on yourself, trust on checklists"
pubDate: 2024-07-25T01:24:19.992Z
draft: true
tags:
  - thoughts
---

## Introduction

Recently, I saw a specific project from [Lukeberry](https://x.com/LukeberryPi) called ["Como Debugar Frontend"](https://como-debugar-frontend.vercel.app/), in English, it would be called "How to Debug Frontend".

The UI behind this project is very simple, it's just a list of checklists that you can follow to match your situation
and validate that you are following the right steps to debug any issue that you could have through your front-end code.
But, the idea behind this project is powerful: we are susceptible to failur, we shouldn't trust on ourselves, instead
we should have a fault-tolerant system that can help us to trust on the process.

## Why checklists matters?

A checklist is a [specific kind of list](./the-awesomeness-of-lists) that we can use to validate if we are following the expected steps to do something.
You can see through the entire internet a range of cases of usage of checklists, like those ones being applied into the
aviation or medical fields.

In a scenario of stress or fatigue, you will be compromised by a decrease in your ability or cognitive functioning. The
usage of a checklist will give to you a way to _"metavalidate"_ your own capabilities and will let you reason about the
current state of the situation you are facing.

On ["The checklist—a tool for error management and performance improvemen"](https://www.ucl.ac.uk/anaesthesia/sites/anaesthesia/files/hales-2006.pdf), the authors of the paper brings some interesting datas related to the
usage of checklists through some fields like aviation, medical and product manufacturing.

We even have a book called _"The Checklist Manifesto"_, that brings some clarification about the usage of checklists and the
spread of the concept. I suggest you to read it, also read the [review from Murat Demirbas](http://muratbuffalo.blogspot.com/2024/01/the-checklist-manifesto-dr-atul-gawande.html), it's a great review that explain some ideas of the book too.

## How can I create my own checklist?

Now that you already know the importance of checklists to bring a better excelence to your work, you, being an engineer (I suppose that you are one), do you agree that you should have a checklist for your daily work?

It will give to you a documented, structured way to validate if some aspect or scope of your work is being followed as expected.
It will help to bring clarification to your work in the future for yourself and for the team that will need to work with you.

So, which things from my work should have a checklist?

- A checklist for the feature that you are working on.
- A checklist with the step by step process to test a new feature.
- A checklist with the step by step process to release a new version of your product.
- A checklist with the step by step process to debug a feature, like the ["Como Debugar Frontend"](https://como-debugar-frontend.vercel.app/).
- A checklist with the playbook when you're talking with a customer.
- A checklist with the presentation of your product for an internal team.

Those are just some examples of the things that you can have a checklist for. With that, you can validate
the reality and check if it matches the expectations of the situation.

## Conclusion

With that in mind, I hope that you can see how much valuable is to have a checklist for your daily work.
You can apply this concept for everything that you do, even outside your work, like the way you talk with your customers.

I want to find some papers and articles that bring some data related to the usage of checklists and their reduction
on incidents and errors that have been happened. But, clearly is a good idea to have a checklist with yourself to guarantee
a pragmatic approach to how you do your work, also it's a way to reduce the noise from outside and focus on the important things.
