---
slug: "on-bookmarks-lists-and-the-habit-of-reading-later"
title: "On Bookmarks, Lists and the Habit of Reading Later"
pubDate: 2024-09-25T22:24:04.178Z
draft: false
tags:
  - thoughts
---

Bookmarks are underrated features. It's a good way to help you keep track
of not only what you need to read but also what you need to do. Further, your
bookmarks can be a way to structure your reading and your knowledge, for future
reference, as Josh Leeb talked about [here](https://joshleeb.com/posts/organizing-bookmarks.html).

## About the organization of my bookmarks

Inspired by a friend of mine, in January 2024 I started having a "reading list"
of my bookmarks. As commented on [RSS and why I love it](https://noghartt.dev/blog/rss-and-why-i-love-it),
I have an RSS feed that I use to read a lot of things during the day. But, one thing
that I missed was the ability to have a list of things that shall store: what I
already read and what I need to read (in the future, that kind of list always
increases).

So, as you can see on my [bookmarks page](https://noghartt.dev/bookmarks), I have
a list containing all the content that I have consumed since January 2024, not just
articles, but also videos, podcasts, etc. I have [another page](https://noghartt.dev/bookmarks/tags)
to see them grouped by their tags, so I can easily find a specific bookmark given
the tag I want.

### How do I store my bookmarks?

The tool that I use to manage my bookmarks is [Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/),
an open-source bookmark manager and "read-it-later" app. For my use case, it's a
great tool, I have their extension for the browser installed that I use to store
the tab that I'm seeing.

Also, I'm using their mobile app, which lets me read all bookmarks that I have.
In that case, I'm using it mostly to read my "read-it-later" articles while in
the gym, for example.

## About the list of my bookmarks

As mentioned before, further the list on Omnivore, I have a list of my bookmarks
inside this blog. I have two specific ways to organize them: grouped by
month and grouped by tags.

Most of the time, I'm using it based on tags because I think that it's how my brain
works, so it's faster to remember what I exactly want. For example, if I want to
read something that I didn't read yet, I can just go to the tag `#for-later`. If
If I want to recover something related to a computer science topic, I can go to the
tag `#cs` or one of their specific subtags like `#cs/distsys`.

Specifically about tags, mentioning again Josh Leeb, who wrote a post about
[Scopped Tagging Bookmarks](https://joshleeb.com/posts/scoped-tagging.html). where
he tries some approaches explains some of the problems and presents some approaches
for it.

In my case, I have a kind of implementation of what he mentioned as HNT (Hierarchical
Namespaced Tagging), so on Omnivore and, you can see here at my blog, I did a hierarchical
structure for my tags. But, I think that it's a process that can be error-prone
sometimes, like when you need to be a more specific tag or a less specific one,
or when You didn't find a specific tag that matches your need for some bookmarks.

## About the habit of reading later

Then, as mentioned before, one of my specific tags that I use (and I believe that
is one of the most used by myself), is `#for-later`. Specifically this tag, I use
to store every bookmark that I didn't read yet but I think that it's interesting.

I don't like the idea of storing "read-it-later" articles at all seems to be more
a product of a FOMO rather than a real interest, but it's something that I am
still maintaining just as a "habit".

Also, I think that it's a trade-off that you need to deal with, your list of read-it
later articles will be growing over time, and you will need to choose and validate
if that content really will be interesting for you in the future.
